Vannak Khin
Professor Smith
Archaeology and Time
12 December 2013
Chronological dating of the destruction of the Colossus of Rhodes
	My project is the dating of the destruction of the Colossus of Rhodes, which modern sources date to 226 B.C.  Model 1
I place the destruction of the Colossus of Rhodes (urn:cite:chron:colossus.f) contemporary with the earthquake which destroyed it (urn:cite:chron:colossus.e). My main source for dating the earthquake/the destruction of the Colossus of Rhodes is Jerome (urn:cts:latinLit:stoa0162.stoa005.hc-helm:30). Working from Jerome, we can see that the earthquake happened in 24th year of the reign of Ptolemy Euergetes (urn:cite:chron:j-alexandrians_ruler3.24) which precedes the first year of the reign of Trajan (urn:cite:chron:j-romans_ruler11.1) by 321 years. Finally, from Pedersen, we know that an eclipse happened in the first year of Trajan’s reign, which he calculated to 98 A.D. If we work from 98 A.D. back 321 years, we get to the year 223 B.C., which is the date that the online transcription of Jerome’s Chronicles have given us. 	This, however, conflicts with modern, secondary source dating, which puts the dating of the earthquake to 226 B.C. How scholars have come up to this date instead of 223 B.C. is not known to me, as I do not know what sources led them to that certain conclusion. However, given the evidence and the path that I followed (which can be easily reduplicated, I must conclude that 223 B.C. is also a possible date for the earthquake. Model 2
The list of events surrounding the existence of the Colossus of Rhodes tell an interesting story and leads to a different chain of evidence, however. Though it is not necessary for the dating of the earthquake, given that Jerome/Eusebius puts the earthquake/destruction of the Colossus of Rhodes to be within “Alexandrians 24,” it is still interesting to see where the evidence can take us. Pliny the Elder states that the Colossus of Rhodes stood for 56 years, so that means that there were 56 years between its finalized state (urn:cite:chron:colossus.d) and the earthquake/destruction . Between the finalized state of the Colossus and the beginning of the creation of the Colossus, Pliny the Elder states there were 12 years (urn:cite:chron:colossus.c). 
To follow this path leads to a currently unknown variable. The next step leads us to the siege of Rhodes by Demetrius, but it is unknown how long it took the Rhodians to decide to build the Colossus. Pliny the Elder states that after the siege by Demetrius, they compiled his leftover war machines to begin creating the Colossus; however, the length of this procedure is unknown. To skip over this step, we have the decision of Demetrius to stop sieging Rhodes (urn:cite:chron:colossus.a) which happens in the same year in which Demetrius decides to fight Cassander when he attacks Athens (urn:cite:chron:colossus.b), as we know from Plutarch (Plutarch's Life of Demetrius 23.22-23). From Diodorus Siculus, we can make contemporary the stopping of the siege of Rhodes by Demetrius with the archonship of Leostratus and the consulship of Servius Cornelius and Lucius Genucius (Diodorus Siculus 10.20.100-102). This “top” part of the chain of events is where we drift off into stranger territory.
From the Fasti Capitolini, we can calculate that there are 315 years between when Servius Cornelius and Lucius Genucius are consul and when Germanicus Caesar is consul. From Dio Cassius 7.56-57, we know that Germanicus Caesar is consul 3 years before Drusus Caesar Tiberi is consul. From Dio Cassius, we also know that Drusus Caesar Tiberi (urn:cite:chron:consul.1) is consul 22 years before Tiberius Claudius Nero Germanicus (urn:cite:chron:consul.23). From Jerome, we can see that the consulship of Tiberius Claudius Nero Germanicus, or Claudius, is consul 274 years after the earthquake/destruction of the Colossus of Rhodes. From there, we can simply insert Model 1 to come back to the same date of 223 B.C. for the earthquake as the reliance on Jerome at the end point means that we will come to the same conclusion. 
Missing Years from Model 2?
This inclusion of working from the creation of the Colossus of Rhodes, however, in tandem with Model 1 can help us fill in the unknown years in Model 2 between when Demetrius stopped his siege of Rhodes and when the Rhodians decided to build the Colossus of Rhodes out of the siege machines. If we go back to equating the first year of Trajan’s rule with 98 A.D. (According to Pedersen’s calculations), we move back 321 years to get to the earthquake at 233 B.C. From there, we move forward again 274 years into the consulship of Claudius to get to 51 A.D. From there, we move back 22 years to the consulship of Drusus Caesar Tiberi to get 29 A.D. 3 years before that time is the consulship of Germanicus Caesar, so now we are at 26 A.D. Going back 315 years from there is the consulship of Servius Cornelius and Lucius Genucius and the year when Demetrius decides to stop besieging Rhodes, which is the year 286 B.C.  	To go back from the destruction of the Colossus of Rhodes, dated at 233 B.C. according to my calculations, we move up 56 years (which is how long it stook for) to get to the finalized state of the colossus, which is 289 B.C. From there, we move back 12 more years, since Pliny the Elder states it took 12 years to complete, to get to the beginning of the creation of the Colossus of Rhodes, which is at 301 B.C.
From the evidence we see here, it is not possible to reconcile the two Models in order to find the time in which it took the Rhodians to decide to create the Colossus of Rhodes out of Demetrius’ siege weapons (which is calculated to be -15 years, a remarkable feat of time travel for the Ancient Greeks). What we can conclude from Model 1 is that 233 B.C. is a feasible date for the earthquake. What seems to be problematic in Model 2 is the lack of accuracy in either the source of the Fasti Capitolini or Dio Cassius’ records of the consuls. Other sources of error may include Diodorus Siculus’ statement that Demetrius fights Cassander in the same year that he stops besieging Rhodes, although this can’t be contested too much as it couldn’t possibly have been a span of 15 years. If Model 2 seems to be unable to prove the chronological gap, then perhaps we could look to a string of evidence stemming from the archonship of Leostratus, who unfortunately becomes archon a few years before the first recorded archon in Diodorus Siculus’ work. Given more time beyond the scope of this project, it is possible to find more sources for archon lists and trace back the chronology even further. 
